[Amit Varma]: I had a strange dream the other day.
[Amit Varma]: I dreamed that I was a writer.
[Amit Varma]: Now you may ask, why is this strange?
[Amit Varma]: After all, I'm a writer in real life.
[Amit Varma]: Well, the reason it was strange is that in my dream, writing was a banned activity.
[Amit Varma]: It was looked down upon by society.
[Amit Varma]: Everyone considered writing shameful.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, it was basically banned by the government.
[Amit Varma]: To practice writing, I had to slink off every day to a place called a Rothel.
[Amit Varma]: There, I would wait in my room or hang around in the balcony looking intellectual until
[Amit Varma]: a client turned up.
[Amit Varma]: It could be a newspaper editor looking for a column or a features editor asking me to
[Amit Varma]: write a limerick.
[Amit Varma]: Even an avid blog reader furtively looking around here and there before paying me to
[Amit Varma]: write a blog post or two.
[Amit Varma]: I would write what they wanted me to and they would pay me or my agent.
[Amit Varma]: Sometimes my agent would pass on only a small part of the money to me.
[Amit Varma]: But I couldn't protest or strike off on my own.
[Amit Varma]: Writing was illegal, remember, and therefore the organized underworld ran writing.
[Amit Varma]: And with the connivence of the police, who they paid regular hafta to, I'd be finished
[Amit Varma]: if I went off on my own.
[Amit Varma]: So in this dream, one day a cop came into my room.
[Amit Varma]: He was there because he needed something from me.
[Amit Varma]: And despite that, he looked at me with distaste as if I was the lowest form of life.
[Unknown]: He said to me, write a limerick for me right away and I won't pay you because I am a policeman
[Unknown]: and I have power over you and you are lowlife scum.
[Amit Varma]: I was very upset by this.
[Amit Varma]: I couldn't help myself and I burst out with a question that had haunted me for a long
[Amit Varma]: time.
[Amit Varma]: I asked, what am I doing that is so wrong?
[Amit Varma]: Why are you treating me with such contempt?
[Unknown]: He sneered and replied, you are selling your services for money.
[Unknown]: You are selling the labor of your mind for money.
[Unknown]: That is immoral.
[Unknown]: Shame on you.
[Unknown]: Welcome to the scene and the unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioral
[Unknown]: science.
[Amit Varma]: Please welcome your host, Amit Badma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the scene and the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: My topic for today is prostitution, specifically the criminalization of prostitution.
[Amit Varma]: Prostitution is generally looked down upon in society, which I find illogical.
[Amit Varma]: What a prostitute does is no different from what a writer or a banker or a cricketer or
[Amit Varma]: a construction worker does.
[Amit Varma]: We all sell the products of our mind or body for money.
[Amit Varma]: Whatever you may feel about a specific profession, you should not deny us the freedom to pursue
[Amit Varma]: it.
[Amit Varma]: We have that right.
[Amit Varma]: And yet society looks down upon it and the law bans it.
[Amit Varma]: I have been writing for years that victimless crimes should not be banned and we recently
[Amit Varma]: carried a series on this on Pragati, the online magazine that I edit at thinkpragati.com.
[Amit Varma]: We had pieces arguing that alcohol, betting, drugs and prostitution should all be legal.
[Amit Varma]: The piece making the argument for legalizing prostitution was co-written by me and Manasa
[Amit Varma]: Venkatraman, a young lawyer who works at the Takshashila Institution in Bangalore.
[Amit Varma]: If you go to thinkpragati.com and click on the opinion section, you will find our piece
[Amit Varma]: with the title, Legalize Prostitution to Stop Trafficking.
[Amit Varma]: In it, we argued that banning prostitution is wrong for two reasons.
[Amit Varma]: One, it is morally wrong because it deprives a woman of choice.
[Amit Varma]: Two, it is pragmatically wrong because banning any victimless crime draws the underworld
[Amit Varma]: in and that never ends well.
[Amit Varma]: Anyway to discuss all that and more, my co-writer of that piece, Manasa is my guest today.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the show Manasa.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you Amit.
[Amit Varma]: Manasa, one of your pet bugbears about prostitution is the way the Indian law defines it.
[Guest]: Can you tell me a little bit more about that?
[Guest]: Yes.
[Guest]: So, prostitution according to the Oxford English Dictionary is just the commercial activity
[Guest]: of sex.
[Guest]: So, it's the taking of money in return for a sexual service.
[Guest]: However, under Indian law, prostitution is defined with sort of trafficking undertones.
[Guest]: So, the law says that prostitution is the sexual exploitation or abuse of persons for
[Guest]: commercial purposes.
[Guest]: This clearly shows that there is no objectivity even in the definition of prostitution.
[Guest]: It conflates human trafficking with sex work, with commercial sex work.
[Guest]: And this confusion translates through the entire law.
[Guest]: What that does is, tries to protect sex workers, but it fails miserably because it treats them
[Guest]: as doing something wrong inherently, whereas prostitution is just simply the exchange of
[Guest]: money for sex.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, it actually assumes an absence of consent and therefore the question of consent
[Amit Varma]: doesn't therefore enter the discourse around it because the law assumes that it's simply
[Amit Varma]: absent.
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: And we see the importance of consent when dealing with prostitution as a legal subject
[Guest]: because if you look at Amsterdam, the whole law around prostitution is founded on the
[Guest]: pillar of consent and that is what makes sex workers and sex work such a safe profession
[Amit Varma]: over there.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, I remember on a TV show many years ago, I think we the people are one of those,
[Amit Varma]: talking about legalizing prostitution and Kiran Bedi was on the show and she was insisting
[Amit Varma]: that there was no consent involved in prostitution, that no one could possibly choose to be a
[Amit Varma]: prostitute.
[Amit Varma]: And it so happened that there were actually ladies in the audience who were in that profession
[Amit Varma]: and they insisted that no, they got into it consensually, which was a point that Bedi
[Amit Varma]: just refused to accept a lot of dissonance there.
[Amit Varma]: And this is something, you know, when I write about economics and I write about, you know,
[Amit Varma]: things like sweatshops, people often assume that no one can willingly work in those.
[Amit Varma]: So therefore they are akin to slavery.
[Amit Varma]: But what they often don't realize is that people who are not as privileged as us often
[Amit Varma]: face a set of really bad choices and they make the best choice available to them.
[Amit Varma]: So some, a lot of people go into prostitution because out of all the options open to them,
[Amit Varma]: it's actually the best option.
[Amit Varma]: And that means that the moment then you make prostitution a criminal activity, you are
[Amit Varma]: telling them to choose an option that they consider worse, you're closing off what they
[Amit Varma]: consider to be the best option.
[Amit Varma]: Which brings me to the whole moral dimension of banning prostitution, that it's wrong to
[Amit Varma]: ban prostitution because you are depriving, you are depriving the woman of consent by
[Guest]: banning it.
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: And for the state to assume morality on a profession that is as legitimate as anything
[Guest]: else, as honest as anything else, is just morally wrong.
[Guest]: It is not prostitution that is per se wrong over here.
[Guest]: It is the state looking at it with complete lack of objectivity.
[Amit Varma]: Absolutely.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, they're depriving the women of choice, which can't possibly be a good thing.
[Amit Varma]: I want to take a sidestep here and discuss something that we hadn't discussed in article,
[Amit Varma]: which is to sort of try and understand why both social views and the laws are like this.
[Amit Varma]: And one of the things I blogged about many years ago was our Indian law on adultery,
[Amit Varma]: which is section 497 of the Indian Penal Code.
[Amit Varma]: And I'll just read out a bit of it to you and tell me how you react.
[Amit Varma]: Section 497 says whoever has sexual intercourse with a person who is and whom he knows or
[Amit Varma]: has reason to believe to be the wife of another man, without the consent or connivence of
[Amit Varma]: that man, such sexual intercourse not amounting to the offense of rape is guilty of the offense
[Amit Varma]: of adultery.
[Amit Varma]: And it goes on.
[Amit Varma]: But I was particularly shocked by that because according to this law, the consent that mattered
[Amit Varma]: was not that of the woman committing adultery, but of the man she was married to, therefore
[Amit Varma]: implying that women are to be looked at as a property of men.
[Amit Varma]: And there are various laws in the Indian Penal Code, which of course originated in Victorian
[Amit Varma]: times, which are exactly of this kind.
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: And the adultery section in the IPC is one of the shining examples of what the British
[Guest]: left us with.
[Guest]: Like you're saying under section 497 of the IPC, it is the husband who has the right to
[Guest]: go to court, but not the wife.
[Guest]: In fact, the wife isn't even wrong.
[Guest]: The wife doesn't even have a say suddenly.
[Amit Varma]: Exactly.
[Amit Varma]: And a few years ago when I blogged about it, it turned out that some states were actually
[Amit Varma]: planning to expand the scope of the law and 30 odd state governments were asked for a
[Amit Varma]: response by the centre to the Malimath Committee recommendations that even adulterous wives,
[Amit Varma]: if they were committing adultery of their own free will, be penalised because they had
[Amit Varma]: gone against the presumed wishes of their owners, so to say.
[Amit Varma]: So this was many years ago.
[Amit Varma]: I think this Malimath Committee was like 10-15 years ago.
[Amit Varma]: So this is something I'd written 10 years ago, which I just came across.
[Amit Varma]: This brings me to the interesting point that, you know, if women are at one level considered
[Amit Varma]: to be property, you know, according to Victorian laws and according to these sort of laws,
[Amit Varma]: and that would explain why women who are promiscuous, so to say, are considered to be doing something
[Amit Varma]: morally wrong per se, which, you know, a promiscuous man, the same assumption wouldn't be made
[Guest]: about him.
[Amit Varma]: That would make sense.
[Amit Varma]: And which also comes to the sort of paradox of how, while when people talk about prostitution,
[Amit Varma]: they assume that there's no consent involved and women are victims, but equally, the word
[Amit Varma]: prostitute or slut is a cuss word by itself.
[Amit Varma]: You know, to call someone a prostitute is to abuse that person, you know, which is also
[Amit Varma]: like where the term prostitute and so on comes from, which is kind of bizarre because the
[Amit Varma]: law assumes that there is no content, but then the attitude of society towards these
[Amit Varma]: people seems to assume that even if there was consent, it would still be a crime.
[Guest]: So last year, a draft bill was proposed in Parliament, which sought to ban trafficking,
[Guest]: and which also discussed prostitution.
[Guest]: But Amit, like you're saying that the current law that we have about sex workers is a remnant
[Guest]: of a colonial era, but shockingly, this bill that was introduced last year is equally badly
[Guest]: drafted and equally lacks objectivity.
[Amit Varma]: Wow, why is that so?
[Guest]: Because again, it conflates prostitution with trafficking, and it assumes this sort of sorry
[Guest]: tone when it talks about sex workers throughout its language.
[Guest]: And what does the bill propose to do precisely?
[Guest]: Oh, it proposes to rescue prostitutes from their brothels and admit them to these homes.
[Guest]: It sets up commissions to inquire into these practices, so on and so forth.
[Guest]: But what stood out for me is that the same tone that was adopted 100 years ago when one
[Guest]: spoke about sex workers is still adopted last year.
[Guest]: So clearly there is a cultural stagnation that has happened when we speak about this.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, absolutely.
[Amit Varma]: And to go back to the argument we made in the piece that we wrote, I mean, our first
[Amit Varma]: argument which we just discussed was the moral dimension of banning prostitution, that you're
[Amit Varma]: assuming there is no consent and you're depriving the woman of choice.
[Amit Varma]: But the second one was a practical one, which is what happens when you actually ban prostitution.
[Amit Varma]: And here we see something come in that the regulatory economist Bruce Yandel described
[Amit Varma]: as Baptists and bootleggers.
[Amit Varma]: And the example he takes is of another victimless crime, drinking alcohol, the example he takes
[Amit Varma]: is of prohibition, where he says that typically prohibition is something that is recommended
[Amit Varma]: for moral reasons by Baptists.
[Amit Varma]: And the people who benefit, therefore, are bootleggers, because, you know, you ban any
[Amit Varma]: victimless crime, the activity is just going to go underground and it's going to continue.
[Amit Varma]: And that makes Baptists and bootleggers sort of allies in a sense, whether they're overtly
[Amit Varma]: actual allies, like in some places, you actually find bootleggers funding campaigns by Baptists,
[Amit Varma]: which is, of course, I mean, the politicians who are taking all of these moral stands.
[Amit Varma]: But inevitably, what happens when you ban a victimless crime, whether it's prostitution
[Amit Varma]: or alcohol, or betting, which is often conflated with match fixing the same way prostitution
[Amit Varma]: is with trafficking, when you ban a victimless crime, the whole thing just goes underground,
[Amit Varma]: the underworld takes over, and the chances of a lot of trafficking taking place and the
[Amit Varma]: consent of the women actually not coming into play are far, far higher.
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: And what happens when, you know, prostitution is made illegal, is that if the woman is then
[Guest]: coerced into having sex with someone, she cannot go to the police and tell the police
[Guest]: that she was physically abused, because what she was doing is illegal in the first place.
[Guest]: She'd be the first person to be put in jail.
[Amit Varma]: Exactly.
[Amit Varma]: And often you'll find that there is this understanding between the police and whatever the local
[Amit Varma]: mafia is, and therefore the prostitutes themselves are actually helpless because the police are
[Amit Varma]: hand in glove with the people who run them.
[Amit Varma]: That's a deplorable situation.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me something, prostitution was legalized a while back in Bangladesh, have things improved
[Guest]: there?
[Guest]: Sadly not.
[Guest]: That's what they found.
[Guest]: They legalized prostitution a few years ago in Bangladesh, but the status of the sex workers
[Guest]: is still the same.
[Guest]: They still live in dingy, small rooms, they still have to go through physical abuse, their
[Guest]: children are still made to see things that no child should.
[Guest]: And this is where it comes through, that while the law is, it is necessary to change the
[Guest]: law, it is not enough.
[Guest]: This is where cultural change becomes important.
[Guest]: On the one hand you have Amsterdam, and on the other you have Bangladesh.
[Guest]: In both countries prostitution is legal, but in one country the sex workers are far safer
[Amit Varma]: than in the other.
[Amit Varma]: So in other words, what you're saying is that the law has to go hand in hand with society.
[Amit Varma]: Social attitudes remain extremely regressive.
[Amit Varma]: The law alone changing merely is not going to solve the problem overnight.
[Amit Varma]: Absolutely not.
[Amit Varma]: And supposing we do talk about changing the law in India, because it will still help in
[Amit Varma]: a lot of respects, how likely is that to happen?
[Amit Varma]: And what's the kind of process that is required to change a law like that?
[Amit Varma]: Can a government do it by itself?
[Amit Varma]: Does it have to go to parliament for it?
[Amit Varma]: Do you need a broader sort of consensus?
[Amit Varma]: Is there one central level law which can be changed, or do all the different states have
[Amit Varma]: their own laws?
[Guest]: How does it work?
[Guest]: Well, there does need to be fresh legislation.
[Guest]: So a new act has to come into being that says that prostitution is legal, it is no longer
[Guest]: illegal.
[Guest]: But before we get to that point, I do want to talk about two things that have already
[Guest]: happened.
[Guest]: One is the famous Varma Committee that was constituted after the Nirbhaya rape incident.
[Guest]: So the Varma Committee was tasked with changing criminal law as it is in India right now.
[Guest]: And one of the things that they recommended was that prostitution be legalized, voluntary
[Guest]: sex work, they said that this does not equal exploitation, and it must not be confused
[Guest]: to mean trafficking.
[Amit Varma]: Excellent.
[Guest]: The second thing that I want to point out is that the courts have the duty to interpret
[Guest]: the law.
[Guest]: And the Gujarat High Court has actually done a fantastic job of setting a better tone for
[Guest]: how sex workers are perceived.
[Guest]: In one judgment earlier this year, they said that a transaction between a sex worker and
[Guest]: her customer is purely a commercial transaction, and there is no morality attached to it as
[Guest]: such and it has to be seen as a business transaction.
[Guest]: And this is exactly the kind of tone that we want in our laws as well.
[Guest]: So while we have a long way to go, it's heartening to see our courts and scholars actually being
[Amit Varma]: on the right track.
[Amit Varma]: And do you think these two recent, like in the case of Gujarat, the judgment, and in
[Amit Varma]: the case of the Justice Varma Committee, their observations, that they're also a reflection
[Amit Varma]: of our society's beginning to view prostitution differently, or are we still stuck in that
[Amit Varma]: backward regressive mode where, you know, slut is a bad word?
[Guest]: But that's an interesting question.
[Guest]: And I actually, my feet are in both lands, so to say, while you have these high courts
[Guest]: and you have these committees that have forward-thinking views, there is a large section of society
[Guest]: which also is convinced that prostitution is wrong.
[Guest]: I'd say at the most optimistic, we are 50-50.
[Amit Varma]: It is neither this way nor that.
[Amit Varma]: So you think 50-50 is optimistic on that note, Manasa, thanks so much for coming on the show.
[Guest]: Thank you.
[Guest]: Thank you, Amit.
[Amit Varma]: That's it for this episode.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you for listening to The Scene and The Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: To browse our back episodes, head over to sceneunseen.in.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow me on Twitter at Amit Verma, that's A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A.
[Amit Varma]: You can also check out my blog IndiaUncut at IndiaUncut.com.
[Amit Varma]: If you liked this episode and would like an encapsulated version of our arguments, head
[Amit Varma]: over to the online magazine Pragati at ThinkPragati.com and search for a piece co-written by Manasa
[Amit Varma]: and me called Legalized Prostitution to Fight Trafficking.
[Unknown]: See you next week.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to The Scene and The Unseen, check out this exciting new podcast
[Amit Varma]: from IndusVox Media called Keeping It Queer.
[Amit Varma]: Keeping It Queer is hosted by my friend Naveen Narona and he profiles LGBT people from all
[Amit Varma]: across the country and some of the stories are really poignant.
[Unknown]: You can download it on any podcasting network.